Update git course with exercises and some more advanced material (#268)
UNIVERSE-HPC/course-material: technology_and_tooling/version_control/10-rebase.md

  - Use interactive rebase to squash several commits into one.
  - Recognise the dangers of rewriting shared history.
attribution:
  - citation: >
      This material was adapted from the OxfordRSE "Git and GitHub" course, a
      derivative work of the UCL Research Software Development Group teaching
      materials and the Software Carpentry "Version Control with Git" lesson.
    url: https://github.com/OxfordRSE/git-github-course
    image: https://southampton-rsg-training.github.io/git-novice/assets/img/home-logo.png
    license: CC-BY-4.0
---

:::callout{variant="tip"}

## Advanced: safe to skip

This module covers more advanced Git features. If you are still getting comfortable
with the everyday `add` / `commit` / `push` / `pull` / `branch` workflow, feel
free to skip it for now and come back once those feel familiar.
:::

## Rebase vs merge

A `git merge` is only one of two ways to combine someone else's work (or the work
on another branch) with your own. The other is called a **rebase**.

- In a **merge**, Git adds a new _merge commit_ that brings the two branches
  together. **Both histories are kept**, and the graph shows a divergence

>   followed by a convergence.

Reviewer: I felt that this misrepresented git merge (which as you explain later can fast forward)

```suggestion
Merging and rebasing are two common ways to combine work from different branches:

- When **diverged branches are merged**, Git preserves their existing commits and normally creates a new _merge commit_ that joins the two histories.
```

- In a **rebase**, Git instead asks:

  > What would I have needed to do to make my changes, if my colleague's changes
  > had already been there?

  Git invents **new commits** so that the result has an apparently **linear**
  history. This is useful when you want a clean, non-branching history, but it has
  a cost: because Git creates new commits, you are effectively **rewriting
  history**.

## An example rebase

Suppose we branched `feature-rainfall` off `main` to add rainfall handling. While
we were working, a colleague pushed a new commit to `main` (say, a docstring fix).
Our two branches have now **diverged**:

```bash
git log --oneline --graph main
```

```text
* a1b2c3d Fix docstring on temperature conversion
* fd30d36 Add rainfall processing placeholder
```

```bash
git log --oneline --graph feature-rainfall
```

```text
* 9e8f7a6 Add inches_to_mm conversion

> * fd30d36 Add rainfall processing placeholder

Reviewer: could you  intead do this with --all (and --decorate?) so we can see both bracnhes and their shared labels in one output?

```

If we **merge** `main` into `feature-rainfall`, the final content contains both
changes, but the graph records the divergence and convergence:

```text
*   b41f869 Merge branch 'main' into feature-rainfall
|\
| * a1b2c3d Fix docstring on temperature conversion
* | 9e8f7a6 Add inches_to_mm conversion
|/
* fd30d36 Add rainfall processing placeholder
```

If we instead **rebase**, the final content of the files is identical, but the
graph is linear - as if we had started our work _after_ the colleague's change:

```bash
git switch feature-rainfall
git rebase main
```

```bash
git log --oneline --graph feature-rainfall
```

```text
* 7c6d5e4 Add inches_to_mm conversion
* a1b2c3d Fix docstring on temperature conversion
* fd30d36 Add rainfall processing placeholder
```

Notice that the hash for our "Add inches_to_mm conversion" commit has **changed**
(from `9e8f7a6` to `7c6d5e4`): it is a brand new commit representing the same

> change, replayed on top of the colleague's work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change but applied on top of the colleague's work.
```

If the other branch is on a remote, the equivalent of pulling _and_ rebasing in
one step is:

```bash
git pull --rebase

> ```

Reviewer: I think this misrepresents this command no? git pull --rebase is not equivalent to git rebase main, this would only rebase on to the same branch on the upstream, it is not rebasing onto main? which is what the previous steps are doing and therefore what this is implied to do.

Recommend just removing this as its not that useful? (unless its something you use often)

### Fast-forward merges

Once `feature-rainfall` has been rebased onto `main`, merging it back into `main`
is trivial - there is nothing to reconcile, so Git just moves the `main` label
forward:

```bash
git switch main
git merge feature-rainfall
```

```text
Updating a1b2c3d..7c6d5e4
Fast-forward
 rainfall_conversion.py | 3 +++
 1 file changed, 3 insertions(+)
```

This is called a **fast-forward**: no merge commit is needed, Git simply updates
the metadata so that `main` points at the same commit as our branch.

> ## Squashing commits

Reviewer: I dont have a meaningful change here but something that I have grown to think is that this process is now mostly meaningless with squash and merge being the "normal" behaviour on github PRs

Again, I don't have a suggestion other than maybe disclaiming that this might only be necessary on complex branches where you don't intend to squash on merge, as squashing on merge ensures main has a clean history regardless of how messy a branch gets.

**squash** several small commits into a single, meaningful one:

```bash
git log --oneline
```

```text
ea15f1a Finish rainfall parsing
ll5432b Fix another typo
de731cc Fix a typo
ab11d90 Add rainfall parsing
cd27a04 Initial commit
```

Those three middle commits should really be one. We start an interactive rebase
onto the commit _before_ the ones we want to combine:

```bash
git rebase -i HEAD~4
```

An editor opens with:

```text
pick ab11d90 Add rainfall parsing
pick de731cc Fix a typo
pick ll5432b Fix another typo
pick ea15f1a Finish rainfall parsing

# Commands:
#  p, pick   = use commit
#  r, reword = use commit, but edit the commit message
#  e, edit   = use commit, but stop for amending
#  s, squash = use commit, but meld into previous commit
#  f, fixup  = like squash, but discard this commit's log message
```

Change the ones you want to fold into the previous commit from `pick` to
`squash` (or `s`):

```text
pick ab11d90 Add rainfall parsing
squash de731cc Fix a typo
squash ll5432b Fix another typo
pick ea15f1a Finish rainfall parsing
```

Save and close the editor. Git rebuilds the history, giving you the chance to

> write a combined commit message, and the trivial typo commits disappear:

Reviewer: Think this might imply the changes are gone rather than them being combined.

```suggestion
write a combined commit message, and the trivial changes no longer appear as separate commits.
```

```bash
git log --oneline
```

```text
de82f10 Finish rainfall parsing
fc52b98 Add rainfall parsing
cd27a04 Initial commit
```

This is a great way to keep your history readable when you have lots of small
"fix typo" commits.

## Rebase: pros and cons

Some people love the clean, apparently linear history that rebasing produces.

But **rebasing rewrites history**.

:::callout{variant="danger"}

## Never rebase shared history

If you have already **pushed** your commits, or anyone else has based work on
them, rebasing will rewrite commits that others already have - and things will
get badly tangled.

> Only rebase commits that are still **private** to your local repository. If in

Reviewer 2: or in a private branch on the remote

Reviewer: I think in general this callout both undersells rebase, cause it is useful even on shared work, and also 

“Never rebase anything already pushed” obscures the actual danger. Rebasing creates new commit identities; if someone has fetched or based work on the original commits, their history will diverge and they must reconcile it after the rewritten branch is force-pushed. 

But rebasing pushed feature, draft-PR, backport branches is routine when ownership is clear and collaborators are coordinated. Could this callout instead say: Do not rebase commits that other people may be using without coordinating with them first?
